BUILDING OPENINTERACT2 FROM CVS
=========================

This document tells you how to build OpenInteract2 from CVS. It should
only be available from the CVS checkout, not distributed in the
by-version distribution.

Quick Start
---------------

 > cd /path/to/OpenInteract2-CVS
 > ./build_all
 > perl Makefile.PL   or   perl Build.PL
 > make               or   ./Build
 > make test          or   ./Build test
 > make install       or   ./Build install


Building OpenInteract
---------------

The normal procedure for building OpenInteract into a distribution is
the same for just about every Perl module:

 > cd /path/to/OpenInteract2-CVS
 > perl Makefile.PL   or  perl Build.PL
 > make               or  ./Build
 > make test          or  ./Build test
 > make install       or  ./Build install

But you'll run into three problems building from CVS vs. from a
distribution. The first is related to packages, the second to inlined
resource files used to build packages and websites and the third to
documentation.

All three of these are run by the 'build_all' shell script, but if you
want to learn more read on.


Problem: Packages
---------------

When you check OpenInteract out from CVS you get all the packages
distributed with OpenInteract in their respective directories. But
they're not in the distribution (.zip) format that the next step
('build_bricks') expects.

To build the packages for incorporating into the bricks (also
necessary for testing), just run:

 > cd /path/to/OpenInteract-CVS/pkg
 > ./export_all

This will result in a number of messages from the 'oi2_manage export_package' 
command to let you know whether there are too many or too few files in 
each package and the filename of the package written out.

After running the command, you should have a number of .zip files in
the pkg/ directory which are used in the next step.


Problem: Bricks
---------------

A 'brick' is a set of resources used when creating a new website or
package. Previously we packaged these in a 'sample' directory, but
they're now in classes created at build-time. The first time you
checkout OI2 from CVS these will not be built, so use the
'build_bricks' script to do this:

 > cd /path/to/OpenInteract2-CVS
 > perl build_bricks

This should output something like:

  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/Daemon.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/Package.pm with 8 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/Widgets.pm with 57 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/Apache.pm with 5 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/Messages.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/CGI.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/WebsiteConfig.pm with 6 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/PackageCPAN.pm with 4 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/Apache2.pm with 2 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBase.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBaseBox.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBaseError.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBaseGroup.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBasePage.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBaseSecurity.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBaseTemplate.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBaseTheme.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppBaseUser.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppComments.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppFullText.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppLookup.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppNews.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppObjectActivity.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppSystemDoc.pm with 1 inlined files
  Generated lib/OpenInteract2/Brick/AppWhatsNew.pm with 1 inlined files

Now you can go ahead and build the distribution and test it out
yourself!


Problem: Docs
---------------

The OI2::Manual namespace is generated using the 'build_docs' command:

 > cd /path/to/OpenInteract-CVS
 > ./build_docs (or 'perl build docs')

This also generates the docs for the OI website -- see the newly
created 'site/docs' for the HTML documentation. Note that it has SSI
directives embedded in it, but that's easy to work around if you need
to...


Problem: SPOPS
---------------

You may also need to checkout the sources for SPOPS checked out and
make them available. SPOPS is fairly stable but sometimes there are
changes made to the OpenInteract2 source that depend on changes made
to the SPOPS source at or around the same time. The SPOPS version OI2
depends on will be in the Build.PL/Makefile.PL.

If you want to build SPOPS and install it the procedures are very
standard:

 > cd /path/to/SPOPS-CVS
 > ./build_docs
 > perl Makefile.PL
 > make
 > make test     # (optional, but recommended)
 > make install

You can also just make the SPOPS source available to your OI2
processes using the normal 'PERL5LIB' variable:

 > export PERL5LIB=$PERL5LIB:/path/to/SPOPS-CVS
 > oi2_daemon --website_dir=/path/to/mywesite

Questions?
---------------

E-mail the openinteract-dev mailing list for help. See:

 http://sourceforge.net/mail/?group_id=16810

for more info about the mailing list.

=========================
$Id: BUILDING_FROM_CVS,v 1.6 2005/02/08 16:34:21 lachoy Exp $