=head1 NAME

OpenInteract2::Manual - User Guide and Reference Manual for OpenInteract

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is the manual for OpenInteract2. It includes information about
how to setup OpenInteract2 (including databases, web servers, etc.),
how to develop modules in OpenInteract and how to extend it for your
own purposes. It is also a reference for the features OpenInteract2
has with pointers to the relevant module documentation for details.

This manual provides an overview of the framework along with examples,
directions, etc. If you need implementation-specific information,
please see the documentation for the appropriate module. (All modules
are listed below.)

The manual is broken down into:

=over 4

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Intro>

An introduction to the capabilities and architecture of OpenInteract2
-- a good starting point.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::QuickStart>

A quick start guide for setting up a website.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Tutorial>

Create a new package and modify an existing one. Developers should
read this first.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::TutorialAdvanced>

Add advanced features to an application.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Architecture>

More in-depth discussion of the major areas of OpenInteract and a
walk-through for a request.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Conversion>

Read this if you're upgrading an existing OpenInteract 1.x site to
OpenInteract 2, particularly if you're going to be migrating custom
packages you've developed.

=item * 

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Changes>

Listing of the changes between OI versions. The major architectural
changes between 1.x and 2.x are also listed here.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Templates>

Using templates, focusing on the Template Toolkit.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Widgets>

Using template widgets in the Template Toolkit.

=item * 

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Packages>

Learn about a package: how we create distributable OpenInteract2
applications.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::I18N>

Internationalization and localization issues in OpenInteract2.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Caching>

How to setup and use content caching.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Logging>

How to use and configure logging.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Authentication>

How to setup authentication and related actions.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Security>

How task and object security works and how you can change it.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Management>

Managing OpenInteract2 using C<oi2_manage> and the
L<OpenInteract2::Manage|OpenInteract2::Manage> framework.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::AdminDatabase>

Setup databases.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::AdminApache>

Setup Apache/mod_perl.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::Datasource>

How to setup and use datasources.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::DataImport>

Importing data into OpenInteract datasources.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::SPOPS>

How OpenInteract2 enhances SPOPS objects and makes them easier for you
to configure.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::SearchResults>

Serializing and retrieving search results.

=item *

L<OpenInteract2::Manual::LDAP>

How to setup and use LDAP support.

=back

=head1 MODULES

=over 4

[% local_module_info = get_local_modules(); -%]
[% FOREACH info = local_module_info -%]
=item *

L<[% info.name %]|[% info.name %]>: [% info.description -%]
[% END -%]

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2001-2004 Chris Winters. All rights reserved.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts. A copy of the license is included in the file titled
"COPYING-DOCS".

=head1 AUTHORS

Chris Winters E<lt>chris@cwinters.comE<gt>

The following people have offered patches, advice, development funds,
etc. to OpenInteract and OpenInteract2:

=over 4

=item *

Salve Nilsen and his team at the Norwegian Meteorological Institute
(http://met.no/) have provided ideas, use cases, bug reports and
invaluable advice throughout the OpenInteract2 beta process.

=item *

Teemu Arina and his team at Dicole (http://www.dicole.com/) have
created a substantial and innovative groupware product called
MimerDesk. They've also been very active in submitting patches, bug
reports and ideas for development, particularly i18n support, based on
their day-to-day usage.

=item *

John Sequeira and HappyCool (running the National Auto Sport
Association) donated money toward the OpenInteract server which runs
the website, wiki site, demo sites and JIRA issue tracking.

=item *

Greg Fenton and the folks at iAnywhere contributed a fully-licensed
version of SQL Anywhere Studio version 9 at YAPC 2004.

=item *

intes.net (http://www.intes.net/) funded and supported OpenInteract
development through its 1.x versions.

=item *

Andreas Nolte E<lt>andreas.nolte@bertelsmann.deE<gt> and his team have
contributed lots of great ideas and have been super for bouncing ideas
around.

=item *

Christian Lemburg E<lt>lemburg@aixonix.deE<gt>, Rusty Foster
E<lt>rusty@kuro5hin.orgE<gt>, Christopher Proto, and many other folks
have helped out. (Please email me if I've forgotten you!)

=back