=head1 NAME

OpenInteract2::Manual::SearchResults - Managing Search Results in OpenInteract2

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This part of the manual briefly describes how to save search results
and retrieve them later, either piecemeal or all at once.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

OpenInteract2 comes with the ability to serialize and later retrieve
search results. This enables users to run large-ish searches and have
the results be accessible at a later time, or in a paged result form
(Page 1 of 12, results 1 - 20, etc.) without running the entire search
again and ensuring that successive pages are consistent..

OpenInteract2 comes with two classes to perform these actions. The
main one is
L<OpenInteract2::ResultsManage|OpenInteract2::ResultsManage>, which
serializes and retrieves the results. The other is
L<OpenInteract2::ResultsIterator|OpenInteract2::ResultsIterator>,
which is an implementation of L<SPOPS::Iterator|SPOPS::Iterator> that
works with the first class to kick out results one at a time.

=head2 Example

First we'll get a list of objects from some method C<perform_search()>
(it doesn't matter what this is) and serialize them:

 my $object_list = perform_search( ... );
 my $results = OpenInteract2::ResultsManage->new();
 my $search_id = $results->save( $object_list );

Next, we'll use that same search ID to retrieve the resultset and get
the first 50 entries back:

 my $search_id = $request->param( 'search_id' );
 my $results = OpenInteract2::ResultsManage->new({
     search_id => $search_id
 });
 my $iterator = $results->retrieve({ max => 50 });

Later we'll retrieve results 51 to 100 from the resultset:

 my $search_id = $request->param( 'search_id' );
 my $results = OpenInteract2::ResultsManage->new({
     search_id => $search_id
 });
 my $iterator = $results->retrieve({ min => 51, max => 100 });

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<OpenInteract2::ResultsManage|OpenInteract2::ResultsManage> has the
implementation documentation and more examples.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2002-2005 Chris Winters. All rights reserved.

=head1 AUTHORS

Chris Winters E<lt>chris@cwinters.comE<gt>
